Fetch Objects if you can (#581)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

|-------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| 0x15  | MAX_SUBSCRIBE_ID ({{message-max-subscribe-id}})     |

> |-------|-----------------------------------------------------|

Reviewer: General comment. May be we should add a non-normative example text on how transition to live can be envisioned with combination of fetch and subscribe?

Author: Yes, but in a follow-up PR.

## SUBSCRIBE {#message-subscribe-req}

A subscription causes the publisher to send newly published objects for a track

> and can start at either the latest Group or latest Object. A subscriber MUST NOT

Reviewer 2: So to clarify, you want to leave AbsStart and AbsRange as subscribe filters, but the numbers are only valid if they are in the future?  I still think Latest Group would be equivalent to Latest Object in that case, right?

> and can start at either the latest Group or latest Object. A subscriber MUST NOT

Reviewer: yes .. LatestGroup will point to latest group's latest object if the subscription is into the latest group ..

> and can start at either the latest Group or latest Object. A subscriber MUST NOT

Reviewer 3: 10/9 Interim result: I believe we settled leaving SUBSCRIBE as-ism for now, but ranges fully in the past or a second subscribe for the same track = error.

Reasons: There is much disagreement on the details, and implementers would not prefer implementing a half-backed new subscribe for Dublin and then have to churn it when we settle on a design.

> and can start at either the latest Group or latest Object. A subscriber MUST NOT

Reviewer: After thinking through this a bit, fetch until live seems like a good addition regardless.

> and can start at either the latest Group or latest Object. A subscriber MUST NOT

Reviewer 4: > fetch until live seems like a good addition regardless.

The problem with 'FETCH until live' is that the live point is constantly moving (especially with 60fps stream-per-frame), therefore there is a possibility of a race condition in which by the time the relay has retrieved content it thought was the live edge, the live edge has already moved forward and it gets in a loop of constantly being behind.

the current object of the current group.  If no content has been delivered yet,
the subscription starts with the first published or received group.

> A subscribe type other than the above MUST be treated as error.

Reviewer 2: Did we want to handle subscribe changes in a separate PR?

Reviewer: good point , may be we should separate it out.

Author: But then we risk leaving the draft in the state it's in, which is awkward at best.

I think I want everyone to be ok with the final functional outcome, and so we need to change Subscribe now.

Sorry to be difficult.

  Filter Type (i),
  [StartGroup (i),
   StartObject (i)],

>   Group (i),

Author: ```suggestion
  EndGroup (i),
```

* Subscribe ID: Subscription Identifier as defined in {{message-subscribe-req}}.

## FETCH {#message-fetch}

A subscriber issues a FETCH to a publisher to request a range of already published
objects within a track. The publisher responding to a FETCH is responsible for

> retrieving all available Objects, and if there are gaps between Objects, it

Reviewer: I don't see a reason to specify gaps explicitly.  How about we say "It is possible from a fetch response to infer if there exists any gaps "

indicates these Objects are not avaiable. A fetch MUST NOT omit sending objects

> due to congestion, like a subscription can.

Reviewer 2: Is the last sentence is needed? The previous sentence says you fetch them all, and if fetch omits an object it will be considered gone by the receiver.

Author: Good point, I made it non-normative.

A publisher responds to a FETCH request with either a FETCH_OK or a FETCH_ERROR
message.  If it responds with FETCH_OK, the publisher creates a new unidirectional
stream that is used to send the Objects.

The Object Forwarding Preference does not apply to fetches.

There are 2 types of fetches:

AbsoluteStart (0x3):  Specifies an open-ended fetch beginning
from the object identified in the StartGroup and StartObject fields.

> 

Reviewer 2: Wasn't the consensus that Fetch requires an endpoint in the request?  You can do HTTP GET Range style and ask for 1-99999999.

Reviewer: I am not sure we need 2 types of fetches. We agreed that if a fetch's end goes past a live edge, then the response include object only up to the live edge.

Author: We had consensus that if you did that, and if it returned at least one Object, you would get FETCH_OK.

But given we already had the concept of AbsoluteStart, it seemed in keeping with the draft to maintain that type of behavior, as Christian suggested.

Reviewer: AbsoluteStart in this cases seems like subset of AbsoluteRange. One can still set a real large end group/object. Regardless, the property (or the principle) that the fetch ends at the live edge at the time of request needs to be specified (and i think it is already).  Also fetch's start is whatever the relay choose it's start is ( going back to Christian's example).
 

Having said that , AbsoluteStart is redundant ?

Reviewer 2: >  Also fetch's start is whatever the relay choose it's start is

Can you clarify?  My recollection in all the examples is the fetch start has to be the first object in the requested range that has a status other than "Object Not Available".

Author: AbsoluteStart is redundant, so I'm happy to get rid of it.  Especially given we don't have restrictions on numbering of groups or objects today, I think the only way to guarantee you get all Objects that have already been published is to put 2^62-1 on the wire, which is awkward, but completely functional.

Reviewer: +1 on removing AbsoluteStart

AbsoluteRange (0x4):  Specifies a closed fetch starting at StartObject
in StartGroup and ending at EndObject in EndGroup.  The start and end of the
range are inclusive.  EndGroup and EndObject MUST specify the same or a later
object than StartGroup and StartObject.

A 'Fetch Type' other than the above MUST be treated as error.

The format of FETCH is as follows:

~~~
FETCH Message {
  Type (i) = 0x16,
  Length (i),

>   Subscribe ID (i),

Reviewer 2: Did you mean to say Fetch ID here?  Re-using the subscribe ID space is interesting though.

Author: Yes I did mean to change it to Fetch ID, so it's an error, but I think writing this as two modes of Subscribe would be much easier to read.

Reviewer 3: 10/9 interim: It was contentious, but I believe the result was to have a single fetch/subscribe ID space for now.

Reviewer 5: It's going to be changed to `fetch_id` right? It would be nice that `fetch_id` has a different space than `subscribe_id`

  Track Namespace (tuple),
  Track Name Length (i),
  Track Name (..),
  Subscriber Priority (8),
  Group Order (8),
  Fetch Type (i),
  StartGroup (i),
  StartObject (i),
  [EndGroup (i),
   EndObject (i)],
  Number of Parameters (i),
  Parameters (..) ...
}
~~~
{: #moq-transport-fetch-format title="MOQT FETCH Message"}

* Fetch ID: The Fetch ID identifies a given fetch request. Fetch ID is a
variable length integer that MUST be unique and monotonically increasing

> within  a session.

Reviewer 2: nit: double space between 'within' and 'a'

* Track Namespace: Identifies the namespace of the track as defined in
({{track-name}}).

* Track Name: Identifies the track name as defined in ({{track-name}}).

* Priority: Specifies the priority of a fetch request relative to
other subscriptions or fetches in the same session. Lower numbers get higher
priority. See {{priorities}}.

* Group Order: Allows the subscriber to request Objects be delivered in
Ascending (0x1) or Descending (0x2) order by group. See {{priorities}}.
A value of 0x0 indicates the original publisher's Group Order SHOULD be
used. Values larger than 0x2 are a protocol error.

* Filter Type: Identifies the type of filter, which also indicates whether
the StartGroup/StartObject fields will be present.

* StartGroup: The start Group ID.

* StartObject: The start Object ID.

* EndGroup: The end Group ID. Only present for the "AbsoluteRange" filter type.

* EndObject: The end Object ID, plus 1. A value of 0 means the entire group is
requested. Only present for the "AbsoluteRange" filter type.

> * Parameters: The parameters are defined in {{version-specific-params}}.

Reviewer 2: Which params are valid here?  Just AUTH?

Author: I don't know, but SUBSCRIBE has params, so I'm assuming we'll need them for FETCH?

Any Objects that are not yet published will not be retrieved by a FETCH.
The latest available Object is indicated in the FETCH_OK, and is the last
Object a fetch will return if the 'Fetch Type is AbsoluteStart or if the
type is AbsoluteRange and the EndGroup and EndObject have not yet been

> published.

Reviewer 2: This reads somewhat awkwardly.  Isn't the object specified in fetch OK is the last one you will get?

Author: My understanding is that the latest Object in FETCH_OK is intended to be accurate, even if the end of the fetch is prior to that object?

> published.

Author: Agreed.  Last week's consensus was SUBSCRIBEs purely in the past were errors, but what they return still seems TBD.

If StartGroup/StartObject is greater than the latest published Object group,
the publisher MUST return FETCH_ERROR with error code 'No Objects'. A publisher

> MUST send fetched objects in ascending order and MUST NOT send objects from

Reviewer 2: Should we describe object ordering in more detail (eg how to use group ID, subgroup ID and object ID)?

Also, what about group order (ascending / descending)?

* Subscribe ID: Subscription Identifier as defined in {{message-subscribe-req}}.

## FETCH {#message-fetch}

A subscriber issues a FETCH to a publisher to request a range of already published
objects within a track. The publisher responding to a FETCH is responsible for
retrieving all available Objects, and if there are gaps between Objects, it
indicates these Objects are not available. As a result a fetch does not omit objects

> due to congestion.

Reviewer 6: I feel like this does not spell out the most important property of FETCH explicitly, which is, FETCH `a...b` will return *all objects that exist* between `a` and `b`.

Author: I think it should be clear now, but I think we should clarify when you don't get everything for SUBSCRIBE?

* Subscribe ID: Subscription Identifier as defined in {{message-subscribe-req}}.

## FETCH {#message-fetch}

A subscriber issues a FETCH to a publisher to request a range of already published

> objects within a track. The publisher responding to a FETCH is responsible for
> retrieving all available Objects, and if there are gaps between Objects, it
> indicates these Objects are not available. As a result a fetch does not omit objects
> due to congestion.

Author: ```suggestion
objects within a track. The publisher responding to a FETCH is responsible for retrieving
all available Objects. If there are gaps between Objects, the publisher omits them from the
fetch response. All omitted objects have status Object Not Available.
```

* Subscribe ID: Subscription Identifier as defined in {{message-subscribe-req}}.

## FETCH {#message-fetch}

A subscriber issues a FETCH to a publisher to request a range of already published
objects within a track. The publisher responding to a FETCH is responsible for retrieving
all available Objects. If there are gaps between Objects, the publisher omits them from the
fetch response. All omitted objects have status Object Not Available.

A publisher responds to a FETCH request with either a FETCH_OK or a FETCH_ERROR
message.  If it responds with FETCH_OK, the publisher creates a new unidirectional
stream that is used to send the Objects.

The Object Forwarding Preference does not apply to fetches.

Fetch specifies an inclusive range of Objects starting at StartObject
in StartGroup and ending at EndObject in EndGroup. EndGroup and EndObject MUST
specify the same or a later object than StartGroup and StartObject.

The format of FETCH is as follows:

~~~
FETCH Message {
  Type (i) = 0x16,
  Length (i),
  Subscribe ID (i),
  Track Namespace (tuple),
  Track Name Length (i),
  Track Name (..),

>   Subscriber Priority (8),

Reviewer: should we call this as Fetch Priority,

Author: For now, I'm going to keep it as is, because I don't want to rewrite the prioritization section.

  Group Order (8),
  StartGroup (i),
  StartObject (i),
  [EndGroup (i),

>    EndObject (i)],

Reviewer: given that we are not having multiple fetch types at this point, should we make these non-optional?

  Number of Parameters (i),
  Parameters (..) ...
}
~~~
{: #moq-transport-fetch-format title="MOQT FETCH Message"}

* Subscribe ID: The Subscribe ID identifies a given fetch request. Subscribe ID
is a variable length integer that MUST be unique and monotonically increasing
within  a session.

* Track Namespace: Identifies the namespace of the track as defined in
({{track-name}}).

* Track Name: Identifies the track name as defined in ({{track-name}}).

> * Priority: Specifies the priority of a fetch request relative to

Reviewer: s/Priority/Fetch Priority?

other subscriptions or fetches in the same session. Lower numbers get higher
priority. See {{priorities}}.

* Group Order: Allows the subscriber to request Objects be delivered in
Ascending (0x1) or Descending (0x2) order by group. See {{priorities}}.
A value of 0x0 indicates the original publisher's Group Order SHOULD be
used. Values larger than 0x2 are a protocol error.

* StartGroup: The start Group ID.

* StartObject: The start Object ID.

* EndGroup: The end Group ID.

* EndObject: The end Object ID, plus 1. A value of 0 means the entire group is
requested.

* Parameters: The parameters are defined in {{version-specific-params}}.

Any Objects that are not yet published will not be retrieved by a FETCH.
The latest available Object is indicated in the FETCH_OK, and is the last

> Object a fetch will return if the 'Fetch Type is AbsoluteStart or if the

Reviewer: I don't see Fetch Type defined. May be this needs to reflect the same ?

Author: Good point, fixed

  ({{session-termination}}).

## FETCH_OK {#message-fetch-ok}

A publisher sends a FETCH control message for successful fetches.

~~~
FETCH_OK
{
  Type (i) = 0x18,
  Length (i),
  Fetch ID (i),
  Group Order (8),
  Largest Group ID (i),
  Largest Object ID (i),
  Number of Parameters (i),
  Subscribe Parameters (..) ...

> }

Reviewer 2: Didn't the consensus include an indicator for "This range extends to the end of the track"?

Author: Yes, added a bool.

  ({{session-termination}}).

## FETCH_OK {#message-fetch-ok}

> A publisher sends a FETCH control message for successful fetches.

Reviewer 3: An important outcome in Boston was that the publisher cannot send FETCH_OK (nit: s/FETCH/FETCH_OK) until it has determined the largest Group ID/Object ID, which may require the result of an upstream FETCH.

So a common pattern may be that the stream opens and data arrives well before FETCH_OK does (which is already a case the receiver has to handle because they're on different streams).

This should be explicitly stated.

Author: Good point, done.

> A publisher sends a FETCH control message for successful fetches.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A publisher sends a FETCH_OK control message for successful fetches.
```

  ({{session-termination}}).

## FETCH_OK {#message-fetch-ok}

A publisher sends a FETCH_OK control message for successful fetches.

~~~
FETCH_OK
{
  Type (i) = 0x18,
  Length (i),
  Subscribe ID (i),
  Group Order (8),
  End Of Track (8),
  Largest Group ID (i),
  Largest Object ID (i),
  Number of Parameters (i),
  Subscribe Parameters (..) ...

> }

Reviewer: wondering if Fetch_OK needs any parameters at all ?

Author: I'm not sure, but SUBSCRIBE_OK had them, so I put them in FETCH_OK.

~~~
{: #moq-transport-fetch-ok format title="MOQT FETCH_OK Message"}

> * Subscribe ID: Fetch Identifier as defined in {{message-fetch}}.

Reviewer 7: Should this be "Fetch ID" ?

Author: As discussed, for now we're going to stick with one ID space.

~~~
STREAM_HEADER_SUBGROUP Message {

>   Subscribe ID (i),

Reviewer 6: I don't remember when we agreed on this, I don't understand why this is in this PR, and I also don't like it because this will break our implementation badly.

Author: I can leave this here for now, but then this doesn't close the various issues around track alias vs Subscribe ID.

Author: I did remove Subscribe ID from these, but we can revisit that if needed.

Reviewer 8: Seems the description of the Stream Header Group missed the removal of Subscrib eID

A publisher MUST NOT send an Object on a stream if its Object ID is less than a
previously sent Object ID within a given group in that stream.

### Fetch Header {#fetch-header}

When a stream begins with `FETCH_HEADER`, all objects on the stream belong to the
track requested in the Fetch message identified by `Subscribe ID`.

~~~
FETCH_HEADER Message {
  Subscribe ID (i),
  Publisher Priority (8),
}
~~~
{: #fetch-header-format title="MOQT FETCH_HEADER Message"}

When a publisher sends objects in response to a FETCH request, it finds the
stream that is associated with the fetch request, or opens a new one and sends

> the `FETCH_HEADER`, and then serializes the following object fields.

Author: ```suggestion
the `FETCH_HEADER`, and then serializes the following object fields. Each object
sent on a fetch stream after the header has the following format:
```

A publisher MUST NOT send an Object on a stream if its Object ID is less than a
previously sent Object ID within a given group in that stream.

### Fetch Header {#fetch-header}

When a stream begins with `FETCH_HEADER`, all objects on the stream belong to the
track requested in the Fetch message identified by `Subscribe ID`.

~~~
FETCH_HEADER Message {
  Subscribe ID (i),
  Publisher Priority (8),
}
~~~
{: #fetch-header-format title="MOQT FETCH_HEADER Message"}

When a publisher sends objects in response to a FETCH request, it finds the
stream that is associated with the fetch request, or opens a new one and sends
the `FETCH_HEADER`, and then serializes the following object fields. Each object
sent on a fetch stream after the header has the following format:

The Object Status field is only sent if the Object Payload Length is zero.

~~~
{
  Group ID (i),
  Subgroup ID (i),
  Object ID (i),

>   Publisher Priority (8),

Reviewer: I think Publisher Priority is repeated in 2 places (header and object message)

Author: Good point, I removed it from FETCH_HEADER.

A publisher MUST NOT send an Object on a stream if its Object ID is less than a
previously sent Object ID within a given group in that stream.

### Fetch Header {#fetch-header}

When a stream begins with `FETCH_HEADER`, all objects on the stream belong to the
track requested in the Fetch message identified by `Fetch ID`.

~~~
FETCH_HEADER Message {
  Fetch ID (i),

>   Publisher Priority (8),

Reviewer 2: How does this get set by a relay with then entire fetch range already cached?

Author: TBH, I have no idea how this gets set, but it was in @suhasHere slides so maybe he has ideas?

Alternatively, we could just serialize Peeps on a stream and then the only special thing would be that it's on a single stream.

Reviewer: I feel the Publisher Priority should not be in the fetch header. IIRC the discussions, i thought the idea was objects carry priority ( as carried over from the canonical object)  so that the consumer fetching knows the relative priorities between the objects.  This means that we need to add priority filed to the object not the stream header ?

Thoughts ?

Reviewer 2: I think removing this priority and adding the other canonical object fields to the object serialization below sounds right.

Reviewer: Agree. Let's start with that.  so the new object looks like the below for fetch ?
{
  Group ID = 0
  Subgroup ID = 0
  Publisher Priority = 0
  Object Payload Length
  [Object Status (i)],
  Payload
}

}
~~~
{: #fetch-header-format title="MOQT FETCH_HEADER Message"}

When a publisher sends objects in response to a FETCH request, it finds the
stream that is associated with the fetch request, or opens a new one and sends

> the `FETCH_HEADER`, and then serializes the following object fields.

Reviewer 2: Do we want different language about how to send FETCH objects -- eg: do we need the bit about when to create the stream already?

Author: Are you suggesting the text is awkward, which it is?  Or asking for something else?

Reviewer 2: The language made sense when it was introduced for Forwarding Preferences.  An object could show up at a relay and the relay needed instructions for how to send it.  But fetches are a little simpler, you can open the stream as soon as you send the FETCH OK, or have the first object to send, and there's nothing else to do on subsequent objects.

Maybe something like: 

> Each object sent on a fetch stream after the header has the following format

Author: SG, I took your simpler suggestion.

The Object Status field is only sent if the Object Payload Length is zero.

~~~
{
  Group ID (i),
  Object ID (i),
  Object Payload Length (i),
  [Object Status (i)],
  Object Payload (..),
}
~~~
{: #object-fetch-format title="MOQT Fetch Object Fields"}

> 

Reviewer 2: Are we missing the bit that says if you receive `G=1,O=0; G=1,O=2` then `G=1,O=1` is implied `Object Status=Object does not exist`

Reviewer: I think that is implied. A note wouldn't hurt.

Author: It's said above in the FETCH message description, but we can repeat it here or move it.

Author: Alan, I think the text you suggested makes that clear now?

A publisher MUST NOT send an Object on a stream if its Object ID is less than a
previously sent Object ID within a given group in that stream.

### Fetch Header {#fetch-header}

When a stream begins with `FETCH_HEADER`, all objects on the stream belong to the
track requested in the Fetch message identified by `Fetch ID`.

~~~
FETCH_HEADER Message {
  Fetch ID (i),
  Publisher Priority (8),
}
~~~
{: #fetch-header-format title="MOQT FETCH_HEADER Message"}

When a publisher sends objects in response to a FETCH request, it finds the
stream that is associated with the fetch request, or opens a new one and sends
the `FETCH_HEADER`, and then serializes the following object fields.

The Object Status field is only sent if the Object Payload Length is zero.

~~~
{
  Group ID (i),
  Object ID (i),
  Object Payload Length (i),
  [Object Status (i)],
  Object Payload (..),

> }

Reviewer 2: Do we need other canonical MoQ fields like Subgroup ID and Forwarding Preference?

Reviewer 3: It depends on whether one can FETCH data that eventually is served via SUBSCRIBE. If not, it's useless. If so, yes, we need both.

But forwarding preference can go in the FETCH header, while (see my comment above) pub priority should go down here.

Author: I assume we're killing forwarding preference in the very near future?

A publisher MUST NOT send an Object on a stream if its Object ID is less than a
previously sent Object ID within a given group in that stream.

### Fetch Header {#fetch-header}

When a stream begins with `FETCH_HEADER`, all objects on the stream belong to the
track requested in the Fetch message identified by `Fetch ID`.

~~~
FETCH_HEADER Message {
  Fetch ID (i),

>   Publisher Priority (8),

Reviewer: For now, may be we should remove the Publisher Priority and revisit this later, if needed ?

A publisher MUST NOT send an Object on a stream if its Object ID is less than a
previously sent Object ID within a given group in that stream.

### Fetch Header {#fetch-header}

When a stream begins with `FETCH_HEADER`, all objects on the stream belong to the
track requested in the Fetch message identified by `Subscribe ID`.

~~~
FETCH_HEADER Message {
  Subscribe ID (i),
  Publisher Priority (8),
}
~~~
{: #fetch-header-format title="MOQT FETCH_HEADER Message"}

When a publisher sends objects in response to a FETCH request, it finds the
stream that is associated with the fetch request, or opens a new one and sends
the `FETCH_HEADER`, and then serializes the following object fields.

The Object Status field is only sent if the Object Payload Length is zero.

~~~
{
  Group ID (i),
  Object ID (i),
  Object Payload Length (i),
  [Object Status (i)],
  Object Payload (..),

> }

Reviewer: we need to add SubGroupId to the object as well.
